At that time of the years of the war, early stages,
the B-17 began to take head-on attacks by the
German fighters in Europe, and they were being
shot down. They were losing a lot of B-17s. As a
matter of fact, the whole daylight bombing
concept was in jeopardy. General LeMay at that
time was a division commander, I think a full
colonel, and
he was devising tactics and formations for the
B-17s to combat just such tactics. So we acted as
the fighters against formations of B-17s in the
Orlando area in Florida. and made head-on attacks
at B-17s. And boy, I tell you, at times it got hairy.
It was worse than combat. Did it come in that close?
Oh, yeah. Well, as a matter of fact,
when Bob Houck, I think his name was H-O-U-K, I
believe that was his name. I'd have to refer to my
diary. He hit a B-17 head-on with a P-47, and he was
flying between a number... two engine and the
fuselage head on. Well, it was simulating exactly
the tactics that the B-17 were confronted with in
Europe. And did the B-17 probably went down, too?
Did it kill that group? No, I think they bailed out.
I think it was a result of that that they divided the
chin turret for the B-17. when they put the guns,
.50 caliber turrets in the chin of the B-17 forward
firing. It was that type of tactics we
experimented with, and it was quite realistic.
And as I say, I think it did good in devising
tactics, and particularly training the new boys
that were taking groups and going overseas,
expanding the Air Force. Then it was at that time,
doing that type of work, that in early 43, when I was
tabbed to go to Washington to be interviewed by
General Arnold for a possible job to Moscow with
Herman. And of course, I didn't know about what the
purpose was at that time, except I was told to
report to Washington. So now we're approaching
the start Russian episode. Well, I want to find out
about tactics. Did you change tactics because of
the way that the Germans were coming head on, or was
it just basically putting another mount on the
B-17? It was, I think it was a change a little bit of
the formation of the B-17. It probably was a
tighter formation with more B-17s up front, a
flatter B, if you will, plus the Chin turret, new
firepower for the front. Now, in fighter tactics,
we stressed, just strictly fighter tactics,
air-to-air combat. We had to stress a difference
in the European theater versus the Far Eastern
theater. And what was that? In the European
theater, it was exactly the reverse of what it was
in the Far Eastern theater. As I told you before,
you know, the Zero was for maneuverable. It was
strictly hit-and-run and dive-out tactics in the
Far East. Whereas in Europe, our aircraft could
maneuver easily and maybe in some cases
outmaneuver the Focke-Wulfs and the
Messerschmitts.
And the what? Messerschmitts. And
Messerschmitts. Particularly when we got the
P-51 Mustang. So, in other words, in Europe, you
tango with them, fight them, maneuver with them.
In the Far East, no. What did you think was the
quality of the German aircraft? I've never flown
one of them, but talking to the pilot and of course
reading about their, no doubt the German aircraft
was a fine airplane. Were they superior to ours in
any way? Initially it was the forest period of
B-40. We found that out in North Africa. As a matter
of fact, that's one reason. Flying Tigers got the
P-40. The British said it was, you know, it just
wasn't good enough. And that's the reason they
developed the Spitfire series. And then that's
the reason we went to the Mustang. And then the old
jug, the turbo-cubitar aircraft that had a lot of
power at altitude.
Towards the end of the war, our aircraft were
easily comparable, of course. But I always go back
to the the bottom line criteria that was the
quality of our pilots. Pilots. The quality of our
pilots. And compare them with the Japanese pilots
and the German pilots. One of those against the
other one? Yeah. I think the German was superior.
But I don't have personal experience in fighting
with the German. And compare ours with those two.
Equally or better, I don't thank any pilot. I still
am the old. I think the American fighter pilot is
the best in the world. Would you agree today that
they are?
Well, I don't know the quality of... Or when you
left the service? Oh, when I left the service,
yeah, I still had confidence we were the greatest.
Of course, you know, combat experience, we've had
more actual war experience later than any of the
other nations. Of course, the Germans, I mean, the
Russians have probably had their experience in
Afghanistan, but practically against what?
Nothing. Now, what about training? As far as the
training, you were training men down there to be
combat pilots, basically. How good was the
training? Then or now? In Orlando, then. Oh,
superb. Tops, you couldn't beat it. That's the
reason we were killing some pilots, because it was
realistic.
But did that bother you? No. Matter of fact, I think
it's a sin to send a pilot over to war and not have him
trained. Yeah. I think that's wrong. But who knows
what the necessities might require. We may not
have the time.
Now, why do you think that you were chosen to go up
and see General Arnold? I'm not sure, but this is an
interesting story, and let me tell you about it. I
got a call at my fighter base in Florida to report to
General Arnold's office, oh, it gave me two or
three days leeway, but at nine o'clock one
morning, and I did so, and it was on the basis of
General Arnold wanted to talk to four
pilots of Lieutenant Colonel rank with combat
experience that had flown a lot of different
airplanes and who could use his head. That's the
only criteria. Is that what they said? Right. And
General Peabody, at that time, commanding the
School of Applied Tactics, told me personally
that it seemed like I fitted that description. So
he recommended me to General Arnold, and I got my
P-47, my jug, and flew up to Washington. And there
were four of us lined up in General Half Arnold's
office. This was in the Pentagon. And he went down
the line just asking one after the other. Would you
like to go overseas? And one of the boys' answer
was, well, sir, I just got back and I'd like to get
more familiar with my baby daughter, which
incidentally was exactly my case. He said, okay.
He asked another guy, would you like to go
overseas? He said, if you give me a fighter group of
P-51, I'll go right now. And third one, I forget
what he asked him and what the answer was, but it's
somewhat along the same line that it came to be. And
he says, Bond, would you like to go overseas? And to
the best of my knowledge, to be very exact, I think I
said, well, General, I think you remember that you
promised that if I went back overseas, you told
General Chenault I could go back with him. And he
looked at me rather straight and very
thoughtfully thinking, turned around, walked
over to the window and gazed out the window a few
minutes. Turned around, leaned back, pulled his
blouse apart, put his hand on his hips. I rank
Chenault.
And then grinned. And after that, we dismissed us
as well. I said, I'll let you all know tomorrow
morning. The next morning, all four of us reported
in at 9 o'clock. And you had no idea what this was
for. Had no idea what it was for. But now, one out of
the four said, yes, sir, I'll go any place, any
time. Under certain conditions, see. Everybody
had conditions. Everybody had conditions,
including mine. And of course, the general arm
personally made the decision. The secretary
said, Colonel Bond, the general would like to see
you. Well, maybe he said that. You know, all four of
us were sitting there. All four of us knew then, of
course. It's pretty obvious it was going to be me.
So I went in, and I can't recollect everything we
talked about, except that I think he did start out
and said, this job isn't for generals at all. But he
said, no. tell you what it is, and I want this kept
absolutely secret. You can't talk to anybody
about it. Including your wife? Including, well,
obviously. He said, you're not supposed to, you
know, this is like a wartime secret. You just don't
tell anybody. And that, you know, I immediately
began to be tense and wondered what in the world is
this? Well, I knew it's overseas because that's
the question he asked me. He said, you're going to
go to Russia with that Mr. Herm. Do you know Mr.
Herm? No sir, I don't. And of course, then he
explained to me what it would be for sending a
military mission to Moscow for closer
cooperation with them. And you're going to be
Ambassador Herrmann's aide for me. You're going
to be my aide for Ambassador Herrmann. You're
going to have the Air Division part of a mission
we're going to put in Moscow for cooperation with
Russia to win this war against Europe, against
Hitler. Also, were you the pilot for Herrmann?
Yes. That was another part of the- See, that's
another part. Flown all types of airplanes. And
obviously what had in mind, we were going to pick
out an airplane, make it into as plush an airplane
as we could for the ambassador to go back and forth
to Russia. It turned out to be an old converted
B-24, which was a liberator in an air transport
model with a bomb bay taken out. bunks and chairs
and put it in, which I'd never flown. I'd never
flown a B-24, but I had to be checked out of here
immediately as part of the job. Well, that's he
explained it. He said, do you think you can do it?
And of course I said, yes, sir. And he said, okay,
you go in and see, of course, General Vandenberg.
He was a brigadier general at that time. And who
served with me came chief of staff. Sure did. And
worked with him. So from then on, of course, that's
what I did. And about, uh, Well, what were your
thoughts? Did you want to go, or did, just tell me.
Oh, yes, I was very excited. This was completely a
new experience for me. I was very excited about it,
and I, of course, wanted to immediately tell my
wife about it, Doris, but I was reluctant because
of the secrecy of the thing, and she was still in
Orlando, of course, and then I thought about my new
little baby daughter, and that this is going to be
tough on her, it's going to be hard, but I want to go.
And of course, I'm in the military, if he's chosen
me and General Arnold, the Chief of Staff of the Air
Force, then gee, I ought to go. And I knew this would
be, it was a feather in my cap, I knew it would
definitely enhance a career. I'd be in a new area
that I'd never been exposed to before in a
diplomatic video with a very important person,
Mr. Harriman. I'd read about him, but I didn't know
him. And here dealing with the Russians, a country
I'd never been to before. It was somewhat like my
experience when I knew I was going to go to China, a
new adventure. So I was very excited. And
eventually, of course, But on the back, I had to
explain to my wife. I didn't tell her until about a
week later what my job was going to be. Nobody knew
what it was going to be. But of course, I made it. I
was released from duty in my job in Florida. And I
was taking trips every day to various places. And
one of the biggest requirements immediately was
to get checked out in the B-24 in a base in
Tennessee. so that I could fly the Ambassador over
in his airplane, the Liberator. In the meantime,
it was being converted and pushed up inside at
another air base. Did you keep the gun mounts on it?
No, no, no. This is strictly an air transport
version. Was it to fly singly or with a fighter
escort? Oh, no, no. Strictly, you know, we would
never get in the combat area with the airplane. In
effect, it was an air transport command type
aircraft. But I was to be the pilot. I had a crew. Did
you make it nice and plush? Oh, yeah. Well, as plush
as you could one of those airplanes. The Air Force
wasn't choosy about that. You knew under wartime
conditions, as long as it was a dependable
airplane. Was it? Yes. Oh, yes. Turned out to be a
good old airplane. And how fast did it go? It's not
like a B-17. It's not quite as fast as a B-17. It's
more of a little bit harder to fly. It was a
lumbering type aircraft, wallowed a lot in the
air, but you could use an automatic pilot. It had
turbo superchargers on it to fly well at altitude,
but of course it wasn't pressurized.
If you get above 12,000 feet, you have to have
oxygen to be comfortable, so we never fly very
high. No need to, except when we fly over the
mountains from Tehran, when we take off to go over
the mountains mainly south of the Caucasus area.
But I think if I ever got there, it was about 13,000
feet for about 15, 20 minutes. How about your crew?
I selected my own crew. I had a co-pilot,
navigator, radio operator, and crew chief. We had
our
base maintenance support out of an air base in
Cairo.
Where'd you keep the plane? In Moscow? what we
called a central airport at that time. It was, if
you will, the main terminal airport for the city of
Moscow. I don't even know why it's called today.
Who maintained the flight? My crew maintained it.
Well, we just had the crew chief and, of course, the
radio operator. But when we had major maintenance
requirements or inspections, we'd take it down to
the air base in Cairo. I forget the name of that
base. It was the United States American Air Force
Base. How about as far as keeping it in a hangar and
just housing the airplane? How did you get along
with the Russians on that? Well, we didn't have a
hangar. We kept it parked outside. They didn't
have a hangar on that air base at the time to take
care of that bigger airplane. Russian guards were
on the airplane 24 hours a day. Even I had trouble
getting to the airplane. I'd have to call through
my interpreters from the embassy out to the
airport and through an interpreter and tell them,
arrange for a particular hour that Colonel Bond,
incidentally, within a couple of months after I
was in Moscow with the Airmen, I was the most
important colonel, and they'd tell the Russian
security forces that Colonel Bond and his crew
would be out to his airplane by a certain time, and
you know, they have to wait to get to the airplane,
and the guard would be told this. In one occasion,
we had a little trouble in communication, and
apparently the guard wasn't told and didn't know,
and the guard would not let me get to the airplane.
As a matter of fact, he pulled his rifle off his
shoulder and pointed it at me and said, near, near.
And the only thing I could do was take the crew back
to the operation building and through the
interpreters, getting through the security
forces, and they had to change the guard. They
didn't change the orders to the guard. They
changed the guard and gave him new orders. And I
want to tell you at this point,
I can say that we in America didn't know what
security was, in my opinion, until we met and
became compliant with Russian security. It was
just absolutely ironclad. There's just no
comparison in our security, in my opinion,
compared with the Russian security. And this
perfect example was the Tehran conference, where
President Roosevelt and Stalin and Prime
Minister Churchill met. And of course, they had
these three type of security forces all over the
city. And when I had to get out to my airplane at the
airport to do some maintenance on it. While they
were meeting, I had to go from the American camp on
one side of the city to the city of Tehran to get to
the airport. I had to pass through some of these
guards, and I met American, British, and Russian
guards. When I came to the American guards,
typical, well, who are you? Stop me, and so forth.
Challenged me in my jeep, and I told him, and well, I
showed him my identification and all, and he, OK,
go ahead. Went to the British Guard. He was a little
bit more strict. And finally agreed, OK, go ahead.
But I went and met the Russian Guard. And yet, I was
not required. I was not permitted to go past them.
He didn't care who I was. I had to turn around, go
back to the camp, and then through telephone and
communications with proper security forces, get
a new pass to go through the Russian Guard. That is
typical of the difference, in my opinion. It's
just absolutely iron bound. What's your opinion
on that? Is it favorable, unfavorable? Oh, I was
impressed. These people, when they say secure,
they mean secure.
Whereas a little bit of give and take, you know, an
hour, it's just... And in my opinion, I think this
is still true. In my subsequent days in Russia, you
know, came to... Many meetings attended with
Russians and the diplomats at the highest level in
the Kremlin right on down to the military forces in
the field. I took several trips to the front. And it
was always the same thing. I was impressed with
their security. Okay, now let's go back to get
ahead of ourselves. Yeah, let's go back. The plane
is outfitted, and then what, you met Ambassador
Harriman? I had several meetings. various times
with the Ambassador. Before he left America? Oh
yes, and we discussed he wanted to know me better
and I wanted to know him better and we immediately
got along great. I admired him from the very
outset. Why? He impressed me as a real diplomat. He
talked quietly and softly and
His mannerisms, I'll never forget, is he would
continually put his hands in his coat pockets. His
coat was buttoned, and he had a mannerism. He was
always going to put his hands in his coat pockets,
and he'd stand away for a while, maybe walk back and
forth and talk to you a little. Then he'd take his
hands out. Then when he'd get to another real
serious point, he'd take that pose again. I, it's
funny, I still remember this. And I've since seen
pictures of him. You know, he's some around 80 some
odd years old now. And I notice he still does this. I
see him in TV. He wasn't going to take his wife. He
was taking his daughter. And he introduced me to
her, a young girl. She was unmarried. A very
pleasant person. And both of them spoke more with
the English brogue. Mm-hmm. I never will forget
this. When he first spoke to me, I thought, gee, he
sounds English. And Kathy, his daughter,
definitely had the English bro. And I think this
might stem from, you know, he'd had a lot of
experience and time in the diplomatic service in
England. He was a very wealthy man, you know, a very
wealthy man from the New York area. and he had had
dealing with Russia before, and incidentally he
was, you know, this was the ambassador. We didn't
have an ambassador at that time. I think there was
an admiral,
there was an admiral who had been on sort of a
semi-ambassadorial staff. Acting, acting
ambassador. Who? Acting ambassador. We had
Joseph Davies, Yeah, he was one. But they weren't
assigned strictly. Well, maybe they were. And
then Ehrman came about. Ehrman was going to be the
ambassador, and he was going to stay in the embassy
in Moscow. And we had, I remember
General Arnold telling me this, and the
ambassador also reaffirming it to me, and even
General
We had three missions from the Air Force
viewpoint. One was to try to open up new air
transport command aerial routes into Moscow from
up around the north, from England to Murmansk,
then down into Leningrad and Moscow, and from the
south up through Cairo across to Tehran and up
through Vladivostok into Moscow. And also from
the east, from across the United States up through
Canada, Alaska, and across the Siberian area,
which was really a challenging task, to open up air
routes across there and use them more freely. The
main thing, use them more freely. And I put that in
quotation marks. Then the second was to...
develop and generate a freer exchange of weather
information and the primary purpose of this of
course was for the far east operation against
japan because we needed weather reports for
weather forecasts we needed the weather reports
from the siberian outposts west of japan in order
to make a valid forecast for particularly the wind
the law You know, in our bombings of Japan is when we
first learned about the so-called high altitude
jet streams. It got as high as 200 miles an hour, you
know, at times. And this is the first time that we
ran into these high altitude operations. And we
need more information for this. Sure. And the
third objective, of course, and which was by far
the most important, was to develop some shuttle
bases for the bombers in the ukraine area of russia
where we could fly across germany from either
italy the 15th air force area or europe the eighth
air force area with their b-17 b-24 bomb and land
and recover in the shuttle bases in russia bomb up
again and go back and of course it would be
continuous 24-hour operations and at the outset
it would only be American bombers, B-24s and
B-17s. And initially only B-17s from the 8th Air
Force. Did you have particular areas in the
Ukraine that you wanted? Yes. I was briefed on all
of this. Every briefing that the Ambassador was
given with respect to the Air Force I always
attended. And also General Vandenberg also
attended. And when we first went over, if I
remember correctly, I think it was,
unfortunately, here again, I didn't keep a diary
of my business in Moscow. I sure wish I had. But I
think it was
about the middle of September that we took off for
Russia. And it was for the whole conference. We
know it now as the Hull Conference. At that time,
Secretary Hull was Secretary of State Cordell
Hull. And we took off from National Airport at
Washington, D.C. The ambassador traveled with
Secretary Hull on that mission, but I took off in my
converted B-24, we called it a C-87, with my crew,
and heavily loaded with a lot of... of
communication equipment and two or three army
officers from the, I think it was called the Army
Security Service at that time, which would be the
secure communication equipment that would be
installed for the ambassador's use, assuming the
Russians would let us do this. And that was going to
be one of the things that Mr. Hull would establish
with Mr. Stalin. permit us to have our own
communications. You know, diplomatic. Sure. And
we made the flight by way of
Europe. So Holvo and Harriman did not go in your
airport? No. I was to meet you. And you left in
October of 43. September. September. Around
September of 43. OK. After about two months of
conferences, In England, we had a lot of
briefings. Oh, I mean, at the Pentagon, and
getting to meet Harriman and everything, and
getting the plane ready took about two months.
Briefings and all, and getting the airplane
ready. And it was very hectic. Now, you started out
talking about Harriman, and you sort of described
him. I'd like to know a little bit more about him.
You said he was a soft-spoken man, but you never
really described his character, or would you I
never really knew much about him at that time
except what I had read about him or seen, but my
personal observations immediately were those I
had just given you. And of course I learned to know
him much better later on. After you were with him
for over a year, how did your evaluation change? My
initial evaluation didn't change very much. As a
matter of fact, I learned more of his
characteristics. He was a extremely hard worker.
He worked morning, noon, and night. Many times I
would be called over to the embassy, say around
eight o'clock in the morning, and he would still be
lying in bed with papers all over the bed, still in
pajamas, maybe in his breakfast tray next to the
bedside. He hadn't gotten out of bed yet, and he'd
probably been working three or four hours. His
aide and interpreter a Navy lieutenant. He, I tell
you, I don't see how he kept the pace he did. I've
seen him when he was- Do you know his name? Do you
remember his name? I think his name was, I'm not
going to say York, it was another Navy commander. I
can't remember his name.
There's a book written by General Dean called A
Strange Alliance, where his name would be in it.
Very fine book, but I don't see how he kept the pace
he did. Harriman was a very demanding man to work
for. I never, he was, to me, he was just I made me tell
Tri, I've got to make a flight to go down to
so-and-so, and said, you take care of this, and I'd
like to leave about 8 or 9 o'clock or something like
that. Let me know the takeoff time. That's all I
need to know. And then
you were laid on for me. That's about all he'd tell
me. And every once in a while, I didn't The more I got
to know him, maybe he would add a few comments. I
want to go down and I want to meet and talk with
so-and-so, and I've got to get this done, and
something like that. He'd clue me in a little bit
more. But never more than it was necessary just to
make me feel as part of the team. So it did make you
feel part of the team? Oh, definitely,
definitely. And we took, immediately, we took a
license to one another. He had a great respect for
me. And he knew my background with Chenault, and
particularly my combat record. And quite often on
the airplane sometime, we'd be sitting and
talking, just discussion. And he'd tell me, get me
to tell him some of my experiences. And very
interested in it. And he had a healthy respect for
Chenault. He considered Chenault quite a hero,
and obviously felt the same way about me. And I knew
he liked me. And as a result, it was easy for me to
like him. We had a great respect for one another. I
had seen him get mad. I'd seen him pace the floor and
actually say to me that this man Molotov, he's
crazy. Crazy. And he realized he was telling me
then some of the problems he had in his relations
with the Russians and... And he would say, now try
this, it doesn't involve you. He said, it doesn't
involve you. And in other words, forget what I'm
talking about. But he was so upset, he was walking
back and forth across the floor as a result of a
meeting he had had with Mr. Molotov. That's what
he'd say, he's crazy. Well, obviously, Molotov
didn't agree with him, or his demands were just
outrageous. I didn't know what the subject was
either. All I know is that Herrmann was very upset
and very disappointed with the discussion he had
had with Molotov on some problem. And was this
typical? I mean, after conversations with
Molotov? This was the only time I've seen Mr.
Herrmann visibly upset. But I do know from stories
and others that he had rough meetings with the
Russians. And this goes back to what I was going to
tell you this morning, their demanding, arrogant
attitude about things that they wanted. They
didn't want things, they demanded things in the
area of Lend-Lease aircraft supplies. And so many
supplies we gave them that we saw in a field later on
were just wasted. We gave them so much that they
couldn't use it. In one case, I think- Well, we'll
talk about that when you go out on the field. And
when you look at- we'll talk about that when you go
out. But why didn't Harriman take his wife? Did he
ever tell you? Yes, she had a very bad eye problem. I
think it was glaucoma. I'm not sure. She had very
bad- very poor eyesight, and
she had to have constant medical care, and
apparently she couldn't get it in Russia. How
often would he go home, back to the States? And you
always flown, of course. I don't think, I don't
remember coming back home on one single trip. He
had 13 months. He may have gone home on one trip by
other means, but I'd get him down to Cairo. My job
was to get him in and out of Cairo. Matter of fact, we
did not, I don't believe Ann Bester ever made a trip
back to the United States. I don't even remember us
making a trip to England. We went down to Cairo and
Tehran for several conferences. Now, when you
flew down to these places, would he ever come up in
the cockpit? No, no. I'd go back and talk to him. You
know, the flight from Moscow down to Tehran is
around, I think, about four or five hours, four and
a half hours, something like that. Around four
hours. Then the flight from there to Tehran to
Cairo is a few hours. And we had time to talk.
Small talk. Every once in a while we'd talk about
the Russians. He'd ask me what I think, you know,
about the men I'd met, you know, and what did you
tell him? He was never surprised at the things I'd
tell him. I had a respect for the Russians in a great
way, their dedication to their service, their
competence, but I'm sure I used the word arrogant
many, many, many times, and he knew what I was
getting at. I'm sure that his discussion was
Molotov and even Stalin. I'm sure, well I say I'm
sure, I'm really sure that the nature of the
discussions, of the air around the discussion was
the same as it was for me at my level and in
particular General Vandenberg. Initially
General Vandenberg attended all these meetings
and I forgot to tell you that they were holding one
decision in advance until, depending on how the
conferences went, the whole discussion with
Darlene, how open they thought back in Washington
that the Russians would be with us and how free our
communications would be with one another as to
whether it was worthwhile for General
Vandenberg, a general, to stay in Russia, or me,
lieutenant colonel whom they knew and planned to
promote to full colonel. And obviously they must
have made the decision that, well, we just don't
think that it's worthwhile to keep General
Vandenberg over there. And of course they had
plans for General Vandenberg and a very great
career back home also, being one of General
Arnold's white haired boys and a very fine
officer. So at least they felt that Colonel I,
Charlie Bond, could do the job for the time being,
and of course everybody agreed to this. So that's
the reason General Vandenberg went on the back.
And then in the invasion of North Africa, if you
remember, General Vandenberg got a key job in air
power. He and Doolittle and North Africa. Yeah,
absolutely. Yes, the ambassador and I talked many
times, and we came very close. He called me
Charlie, and I would always address him, Mr.
Ambassador. I had a very healthy respect for him. I
wondered at times about his health. He always
walked in a stooped, with his shoulders sort of a
stooped attitude. But as far as being sharp,
mentally sharp, I thought he was terrific. He
never spoke openly to me about
the details of, let's say, a personal discussion
with Starling. I've heard him discuss... Did you
ever ask him what kind of man is Starling? Oh, yes.
As a matter of fact, we, you know, this is the kind of
question we're always asking each other. I felt
free to ask, what do you think of Mr. Starling and
Mr. Molotov? And he'd give me, there were never
answers that were, showed that there was a obvious
dislike for any of them, but on the other hand, it
was very obvious to me that it wasn't an answer that
indicated he thought they were terrific people. I
knew he was having problems, and I knew he was
having, you know, even discussion problems. They
were very demanding people, and I had an idea that
his discussions with them at times were
difficult. How did he answer when you asked him
what kind of man is Stalin? Do you remember? No, I
don't remember exactly, except that he indicated
that he was, you know, a very dedicated
great man, that type of thing, and had a great,
terrific responsibility and a terrific job.
Never anything about a horrible communist, never
anything indicating that, never anything about
a... dictator who was killing people, you know,
never anything like that. I don't ever recall him
making a comment, really, about a Russian leader
that, except that time I was telling you about
Molotov, when he walked back and forth and he was
obviously dissatisfied. But that's the only time
that you ever remember him making a negative
comment about a Russian leader, even though he was
going through these torturous negotiations. He
must have had a tremendous amount of control. He
did, with no doubt in my mind. And I'm sure that's
one of the reasons he selected the job. Because of
his dealings, I think it was over magnesium,
business dealings in previous years with Russia.
He had been to Russia before and was a businessman.
Of course, he was a diplomat, and I think that's one
of the reasons he was chosen by President
Roosevelt. Did
Harriman ever make any statements about
Roosevelt?
I don't remember any particular statement, but I
do know there was a terrific mutual respect there
between the two men, and one thing, Harriman and I
was, you know, I was privy to the diplomat cables
coming back and forth, Mr. Herman never wasted any
time writing to Hull, the Secretary of State. His
bars were always to President Roosevelt. Direct
and no doubt who he worked with.
Did you get to read the cables? Many of them I did.
Not all of them, of course. But anything
pertaining particularly to the Air Force was a
problem. I was head of the Air Division. There was a
Navy Division, Air, Army, and then Lease. Navy
Commander had the Naval Division, I had the Air
Force Division, Army Brigadier General had the
Army Division, and a, I think a two-star general,
Army Commander, had the Land Legion Division. And
we worked under General Dean, Gus Dean. Yeah. And I
was wondering about how did the different
services, the different branches of the embassy
How well did they work and cooperate on their
heroine? Very well, very well. Matter of fact, I
don't ever remember having any
problems from the standpoint of coordination
between the services. There were just no type of
problem like that that would have to come up
because we weren't involved in tactics. You know,
we weren't fighting combat. The Navy had their
supply functions to supply,
in other words, give supplies and get supplies to
Russia by the way of Murmansk and Vladivostok. And
by the way, the chief coordinator for the weather
objective, the weather exchange, was a Navy
commander. And that, by the way, turned out very
well. They cooperated. Well, we're going to talk
about all those three things that you wanted to try
to accomplish. There was no problems. But as far
as... Okay. Now, Dean was in charge. He was sort of
the chief of staff. He was the head of the U.S.
Military Mission in Russia. Okay. Tell me about
General Dean. General Dean was a very fine
officer. I have the utmost respect and admiration
for him. He had a hard job. He was very much the
personality of Mr. Harriman. Easygoing,
soft-spoken, wore heavy, very heavy spectacles,
and
had a very keen sense of humor.
I don't know the basic arm that he was trained in in
the Army. He was a major general at the time,
but he He was a fine diplomatic type. He was a
perfect man for that job. I've seen him many, many
more times than I did the Mr. Herman be angry and
upset. And of course we talked. I had the chance to
talk to him more than I did the Ambassador because
my office was in his office.
He had
He had a healthy respect for the Russians.
Of course, many of the things I believe about the
Russians, you know, stem from our continual
relations and discussions. Many of my feelings,
or his feelings, may very well be that he learned
some things from me. You know, I would continue to
tell him about my relations with the Russians.
Well, what did he have to say about his?
Looking back and sort of recapping general
feelings about the Russians, he
respected their combat capability and their
dedication to the war effort.
he thought of them in terms of and so did I and we
actually saw this on a field visit to the front
which I had several rather primitive in their
efforts of supply and
organization but nevertheless and I emphasize
this nevertheless very effective in combat
because they to quote their statement. We killed
Germans. We killed Germans.
In that respect, we had a great deal of admiration
and respect for the Russians. I should think that,
of course, they were fighting on their own soil.
This made quite a difference. Can you imagine
visiting Americans fighting, let's say, on
caught in the United States someplace, an
invader, can you imagine the spirit that you would
see there? Well, this is what we saw in Russia.
In spite of that, however, I still say that a war
between Russia and the United States and actually
locked in combat on ground, sea, or air.